draft: add polling profile page (#3832)
kubeshop/tracetest: docs/docs/concepts/polling-profiles.mdx

---
id: polling-profiles
title: Polling Profiles
description: Polling profiles define how Tracetest will interact with a Tracing Backend to retrieve traces from tests
keywords:
  - tracetest
  - trace-based testing
  - observability
  - distributed tracing
  - testing
image: https://res.cloudinary.com/djwdcmwdz/image/upload/v1698686403/docs/Blog_Thumbnail_14_rsvkmo.jpg
---

> When running a trace-based testing, a crucial thing to have is the trace generated by the test execution. Usually, these traces are stored

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running trace-based testing, it is crucial to have the trace generated by the test execution. Usually, these traces are stored
```

in a tracing backend (Jaeger, Tempo, etc) or they can be sent directly to Tracetest via OpenTelemetry Collector. In both cases, the trace is not

> complete as soon as the test is run, the application might run a long-running operation or it's batching generated spans before sending them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
complete as soon as the test is run, the application might run a long-running operation or is batching generated spans before sending them
```

> to the tracing backend. In any case, spans are not sent instantaneous and are not available for Tracetest as soon as the test trigger is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the tracing backend. In any case, spans are not sent instantaneously and are not available for Tracetest as soon as the test trigger is
```

done running.

This means that Tracetest needs to check periodically if the trace is complete or not. For this, it uses a `Polling Profile`. This profile

> tells Tracetest how often and how long to wait for a trace to be done. Every Tracetest environment has one default polling profile, it means that any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tells Tracetest how often and how long to wait for a trace to finish. Every Tracetest environment has one default polling profile, meaning that any
```

> test will use that profile when trying to fetch the trace from the tracing backend. However, since version v1.0.0, users can now specify a different

Reviewer: ```suggestion
test will use that profile when trying to fetch the trace from the tracing backend. Since version v1.0.0, users can now specify a different
```

> polling profile per test, which makes more sense than having a single profile due to some tests being pretty quick to run and other can take from minutes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
polling profile per test. This makes more sense than having a single profile, due to some tests being pretty quick to run and others can take minutes
```

to hours to finish executing.

```yaml
# test.yaml
type: Test
spec:
    name: my quick test
    pollingProfile: ./quick-polling-profile.yaml
    trigger:
        type: http
        httpRequest:
            url: http://${env:ENDPOINT}/api/resource
            method: GET
```

```yaml
# quick-polling-profile.yaml
type: PollingProfile
spec:
    name: quick polling profile
    strategy: periodic
    periodic:
        retryDelay: 5s
        timeout: 60s
```

> **retryDelay**: how long Tracetest must wait between trace polling tries. If set as 5s, Tracetest will try to get the trace every 5 seconds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**retryDelay**: How long Tracetest must wait between trace polling tries. If set as 5s, Tracetest will try to get the trace every 5 seconds.
```

> **timeout**: how long Tracetest must keep trying getting a trace, if it takes more than the value set in timeout, the test fails

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**timeout**: How long Tracetest must keep trying getting a trace. If it takes more than the value set in timeout, the test fails.
```
